Add spec for TFMs in .NET 5 (#92)
dotnet/designs: accepted/2020/net5/net5.md

Mono/Xamarin/Unity are based on a different set of runtimes and frameworks than
the .NET Framework/Silverlight/UWP/.NET Core lineage. With .NET Standard, we
have started to remove the differences in the API surface. With .NET 5, the goal
is to converge these lineages onto a single product stack, thus unifying
their *implementations*.

![](pic01.png)

While we strive to provide an experience where you don't have to reason about
the different kinds of .NET, we still don't want to fully abstract away the
underlying OS, so you'll continue to be able to call OS specific APIs, be that
via P/Invokes, WinRT, or the Xamarin bindings for iOS and Android APIs.

Now think about developers who start on this stack and can write any application
for any of the platforms that .NET provides support for. The branding we
currently have makes no sense to them. To find documentation and tutorials, the
only two things a developer should need to know is the name and version of their
technology stack.

Let's contrast this with some of the NuGet packages that developers have to
author for today's world:

![](pic02.png)

There are a lot of names and version numbers. Knowing who is compatible with who

> is impossible with a decoder ring. We've simplified this greatly with .NET

Reviewer: Based on the context, this looks like a typo:

```suggestion
is impossible without a decoder ring. We've simplified this greatly with .NET
```

## Scenarios and User Experience

### Vary implementation

Ida is working on an Xamarin Forms application that supports Android, iOS, and
Windows. Her application needs GPS information, but only a very limited set.
Since there is no portable GPS API, she writes her own little abstraction
library using multi-targeting.

By doing so she's able to encapsulate the GPS access without having to
multi-target her entire application, just this one area.

```C#
public static class GpsLocation
{
    public static bool IsSupported
    {
        get
        {
#if ANDROID || IOS || WINDOWS
            return true;
#else
            return false;
#endif
        }
    }

    public static (double Latitude, double Longitude) GetCoordinates()
    {
#if ANDROID
        return AndroidAPI();
#elif IOS
        return AppleAPI();
#elif WINDOWS
        return WindowsAPI();
#else
        throw new PlatformNotSupportedException();
#endif
    }
}
```

### Vary API surface

Ada is a developer on SkiaSharp, a cross-platform 2D graphics API for .NET
platforms based on Google's Skia Graphics Library. The project is already using
multi-targeting to provide different implementations for different platform. To

> make it easier to use, she's adding a new `SkipSharpImage` type, which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
make it easier to use, she's adding a new `SkiaSharpImage` type, which
```

currently have makes no sense to them. To find documentation and tutorials, the
only two things a developer should need to know is the name and version of their
technology stack.

Let's contrast this with some of the NuGet packages that developers have to
author for today's world:

![](pic02.png)

There are a lot of names and version numbers. Knowing who is compatible with who
is impossible with a decoder ring. We've simplified this greatly with .NET
Standard, but this still requires a table that maps .NET Standard versions to
.NET implementation versions.

The proposal is to reuse the existing net TFM and model OS-specific APIs on top
via a new syntax:

* `net5.0`. This TFM is for code that runs everywhere. It combines and replaces
  the `netcoreapp` and `netstandard` names. This TFM will generally only include
  technologies that work cross-platform (modulo pragmatic concessions, like we
  already did in .NET Standard).

* `net5.0-win`, `net5.0-ios`, `net5.0-android`. These TFMs represent OS specific
  flavors of .NET 5 that include `net5.0` plus OS-specific bindings.

NuGet should use this next syntax to automatically understand that `net5.0` can

> be consumed from net6-win (but not the other way around). But more importantly,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be consumed from `net6-win` (but not the other way around). But more importantly,
```

Reviewer 3: Is this supportd to be `net6-win`? Or `net5-win` (really `net5.0-win`)? If it's correct, I suggest adding both so it's less confusing.

Author: It's supposed to be `net6.0-win`. Fixed.

this notation will also enable developers to intuitively understand
compatibility relationships because they are expressed by naming, rather than by
mapping tables. Yay!

## Scenarios and User Experience

### Vary implementation

> Ida is working on an Xamarin Forms application that supports Android, iOS, and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Ida is working on a Xamarin Forms application that supports Android, iOS, and
```

Windows. Her application needs GPS information, but only a very limited set.
Since there is no portable GPS API, she writes her own little abstraction
library using multi-targeting.

> By doing so she's able to encapsulate the GPS access without having to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By doing so, she's able to encapsulate the GPS access without having to
```

multi-target her entire application, just this one area.

```C#
public static class GpsLocation
{
    public static bool IsSupported
    {
        get
        {
#if ANDROID || IOS || WINDOWS
            return true;
#else
            return false;
#endif
        }
    }

    public static (double Latitude, double Longitude) GetCoordinates()
    {
#if ANDROID
        return AndroidAPI();
#elif IOS
        return AppleAPI();
#elif WINDOWS
        return WindowsAPI();
#else
        throw new PlatformNotSupportedException();
#endif
    }
}
```

### Vary API surface

Ada is a developer on SkiaSharp, a cross-platform 2D graphics API for .NET
platforms based on Google's Skia Graphics Library. The project is already using
multi-targeting to provide different implementations for different platform. To
make it easier to use, she's adding a new `SkipSharpImage` type, which

> represents a bitmap and be constructed via OS-provided data types. Ada uses

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
represents a bitmap and can be constructed via OS-provided data types. Ada uses
```

`#if` to expose different constructors on different platforms:

```C#
public static class SkiaSharpImage
{
#if ANDROID
    public SkiaSharpImage(Android.Media.Image nativeImage) { /* ... */  }
#endif

#if IOS
    public SkiaSharpImage(NSImage nativeImage) { /* ... */ }
#endif

#if WINDOWS
    public SkiaSharpImage(Windows.Media.BitmapImage nativeImage) { /* ... */ }
#endif
}
```

## Requirements

### Goals

* Use naming that aligns with product strategy
* Merge .NET Core and .NET Standard into a single concept
* Developers should be able to understand compatibility relationships without
  having to consult a mapping table.
* Provide compatibility with existing concepts and NuGet packages
* It would be great to get this into .NET 5 Preview 1

### Non-Goals

* Replace TFMs or expand runtime identifiers (RIDs)
* Support multi-targeting between OS versions

## Design

> | TFM             | Compatible With                                            | Comments                          |

Reviewer 5: Could you please also add `net5.0-wasm` to the table for clarity

| net5.0-android  | xamarin.android                                            |                                   |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5)                     |                                   |
| net5.0-ios      | xamarin.ios                                                |                                   |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5)                     |                                   |
| net5.0-macos    | xamarin.macos                                              |                                   |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5)                     |                                   |
| net5.0-tvos     | xamarin.tvos                                               |                                   |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5)                     |                                   |
| net5.0-watchos  | xamarin.watchos                                            |                                   |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5)                     |                                   |

> | net5.0-win      | netcoreapp1..3.1                                           | WinForms + WPF and probably WinUI |

Reviewer 6: The use of the phrase 'probably WinUI' is going to confuse/frustrate some people, as I think you found when you did the video.  You may want to somehow clarify the scenario you are talking about:

- WinUI will probably be supported by .NET 5.0, but it might not be supported at all
OR
- WinUI will definitely be supported by .NET 5.0, and will probably be categorized under the 'net5.0-win' TFM, but it might be categorized under a new TFM not shown here.

Author: I've removed WinUI entirely for now to avoid any confusion. Their plans are still up in the air, so which version of .NET will support is speculative at this point.

|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5)                     |                                   |
| Tizen, Unity... | Will follow the Xamarin model                              |                                   |

> ***Open Issue**. In case of Xamarin, there is a discussion of whether the

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
**Open Issue**. In case of Xamarin, there is a discussion of whether the
```

Author: Not a bug. That's for italics. The closing star is at the end of the paragraph 😄

Reviewer 8: Maybe try with _? GitHub is confused with this formatting and can't render the rest of the text right in preview.

Author: Ah, regex syntax coloring FTW! I'll try.

convergence with .NET Core will be a breaking change for existing NuGet packages
(for example, there is a desire to change their namespaces). In that case, we
should not map it to the existing TFM as that would be pointless.*

***Open Issue**. Will the above scheme work for iPad?*

### Mapping to properties

There are three existing MSBuild properties:

| Property                        | Meaning            | Examples                         |
|---------------------------------|--------------------|----------------------------------|

> | TargetFramework (TFM)           | The short name     | `net4`, `netcoreapp3.0`          |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| TargetFrameworkMoniker (TFM)           | The short name     | `net4`, `netcoreapp3.0`          |
```

Reviewer 9: That change is not correct, its called TargetFramework.  Please call this "friendly name" and not "short name". It is not a canonical representation, unlike the combination of TFI, TFV, TFP.

Reviewer 2: I mean, indeed the property is `TargetFramework`, but TFM stands for `Target Framework Moniker` as it can be seen on this doc : [Target frameworks in SDK-style projects](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/frameworks#latest-target-framework-versions)

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/17796723/74593472-d3799d80-502b-11ea-9cc3-be49259de6d2.png)

Author: @joeltankam this column is about MSBuild properties, not names in the UI.

Author: > Please call this "friendly name" and not "short name". It is not a canonical representation, unlike the combination of TFI, TFV, TFP.

Good point, fixed/

MSBuild too.*

* [@rainersigwald](https://github.com/rainersigwald): We've made it pretty far
  with duplicated logic, but it results in really ugly MSBuild, since it's not a
  very expressive programming language. It also creates the potential for drift
  between the two definitions. That said, exposing it directly would create a
  new tight coupling between MSBuild and NuGet that hasn't historically existed.
  It would probably require a direct dependency and update flow plus coherency
  requirements on both .NET Core SDK and VS insertions. If the logic were in a
  separate package (we've talked about pushing it down to the framework at
  various times) it'd be great to just expose that. With the logic in NuGet,
  it's reasonable either way, just different tradeoffs. I'm amenable to exposing
  a property function, but maybe we should go down the road of not doing it at
  first.

We're going to map the new entries as follows:

| Framework      | Identifier    | Version | Profile |
|----------------|---------------|---------|---------|
| net48          | .NETFramework | 4.8     |         |
| net5.0         | .NETCoreApp   | 5.0     |         |

> | net5.0-android | .NETCoreApp   | 5.0     | android |

Reviewer 9: This is currently problematic; profiles are a subset of a non-profiled version not a superset, and there are build errors/warnings that enforce those rules.

Author: We no longer user profiles.

.targets are prepared. Link to DavKean’s doc on how to do it.*

***Open Issue**. We should try to keep the TFI out of the .nuspec file. It seems
NuGet uses the long form `.NETFramework,Version=4.5` in the dependency groups.
We may want to change NuGet to allow the short form there as well and update our
packaging tools to re-write to short name on pack.

Specifically:

* **We'll continue to use .NETCoreApp as the TFI**. This reduces the number of
  pieces and build logic that needs to change in .NET SDK.

* **net4x and earlier will continue to use .NETFramework as the TFI**. This
  means that net4 and net5 aren't considered compatible by default, but the
  compatibility will continue to be handled by the AssetTargetFallback in the
  SDK/NuGet restore.

* **We'll use the existing profile concept to encode the OS selection.** It's
  worth noting that profiles today make things smaller whereas this use makes
  things larger. We believe this can be handled in the NuGet layer by using this
  rule for net5 and up. While that's not ideal, it reduces the number of
  concepts we need to add.

### TFMs are a closed set

> One question is whether third parties can extend the TFM space (i.e. the part

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
One question is whether third parties can extend the TFM space (that is, the part
```

after the dash) without having to rely on changes in NuGet/MSBuild. Due to the

> expansion of short name into TFI & TFM this would be non-trivial.

Reviewer 9: Similar to how it works today, `TargetFramework` is a user-written friendly name and isn't used other than expanding out to the canonical version of TFI, TFV, TFP. Please do not change this.

Author: I'm not sure what you're asking? We're basically just saying that we don't want to support `net5.0-xxx` unless we know what `xxx` is.

We may open this up in the future, but for now the consensus was that we'd
prefer to have the specific list of names that are expanded by NuGet.

> ### What about .NET 10?

Reviewer 10: Here is an idea:

What if you call the TFMs after the convergence `dotnet` instead of just `net`. So it would be `dotnet5.0`, `dotnet5.0-win`, `dotnet10.0` and so on. In my view this would generally solve the confusion with all the existing TFMs (e.g. `net10`,`net20`,`net48`, netstandard2.0, `netcoreapp3.1`, `netcore45`).  `dotnet10.0` cannot be confused with the existing `net10`.

And `net5.0` is not just 0.2 better than `net48`! 

The convergence marks an important turning point in the history of the thing that once was called ".NET" and from now on shall only be referred to as the one and only "dotnet".  

https://twitter.com/bitbonk/status/1228597458764214272

Reviewer 11: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/nuget/reference/target-frameworks#deprecated-frameworks
`dotnet50` to `dotnet56` also already have meanings. Is `dotnet50` 10 times better than `dotnet5`?

Reviewer 10: What did these *deprecated* TFMs actually mean? Have they ever been actually used? Does a nupkg with such a TFM exist on nuget.org?

Author: We're not going to use `dotnet` because `net` has way more prior art and will feel more natural. The issue with dots exists everywhere; it's a minor issue and NuGet can start to issue warnings when dots are missing, which is tracked by https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/9215.

Due to the fact that we're planning to bump the major version every year, we
have to think about what will happen with version parsing in case of two digit
version numbers, such as `net10`. Since `net10` already has a meaning (.NET

> Framework 1.0) we need to keep it that way. To avoid suprises, we'll by default

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Framework 1.0) we need to keep it that way. To avoid surprises, we'll by default
```

> use dottet version numbers in project templates to push developers towards being

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
use dotnet version numbers in project templates to push developers towards being
```

Reviewer: I don't think that this is a typo. Here the docs is referring to the "dot" (the `.`) in the version number, like demonstrated in the table below (e.g. `5.0` or `10.0`).

Reviewer 8: You're right, removed my previous suggestion. But dottet is still a typo though.

Reviewer 12: I think the intended word here might be "dotted"

Author: Correct

> use dottet version numbers in project templates to push developers towards being

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
use dotted version numbers in project templates to push developers towards being
```

explicit.

| Framework      | Identifier    | Version| Comment
|----------------|---------------|--------|----------------------------------

> | net5           | .NETCoreApp   | 5.0    | Will work, but shouldn't be used.

Reviewer 3: Is there a reason to keep this working? It'd be better to kill it ASAP, IMO.

Author: That would be a breaking change in NuGet and isn't specific to `net5`, it's that single version digits are valid and have meaning.

Reviewer 14: I agree with @NickCraver this will bite us. Can we at least add some validation in the SDK somewhere to error out if we see the single version digit being used?

Author: Sure, that's reasonable, but I think this is out-of-scope for this document and should be a feature request to NuGet. @rrelyea mentioned something similar. I filed https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/9215 to track this.

Reviewer 14: I don't think this should be a NuGet side warning, I'd rather we prevent `net5` completely e.g. by erroring if `TargetFramework=net5` somewhere in Microsoft.NET.Sdk

Author: Not sure it's worth making an error, to be honest. But let's have that conversation on the NuGet issue.

| net5.0         | .NETCoreApp   | 5.0    |
| net10          | .NETFramework | 1.0    |
| net10.0        | .NETCoreApp   | 10.0   |

### Preprocessor Symbols

* TODO

> Today, impliicit `#if` conditions get generated based off the

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Today, implicit `#if` conditions get generated based on the
```

`TargetFrameworkIdentifier`, so users today have:

```C#
#if NETCOREAPP
#elif NETFRAMEWORK
#endif
```
With this proposal, the `#if NETCOREAPP` condition will still be available when

> targeting `net5`, `net6`, etc and will also be turned on for `netcoreapp2.1`,

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
targeting `net5`, `net6`, etc. and will also be turned on for `netcoreapp2.1`,
```

Reviewer 3: Also: if we're saying `net5` shouldn't be used...we shouldn't do it in this document either. It should be `net5.0` everywhere, right?

Author: Fixed

`netcoreapp3.1`, etc. Is that intended? Do we want a new implicit condition that

> is versionless but targets all TFMs above `net5`? i.e. `#if NET`.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
is versionless but targets all TFMs above `net5`? That is, `#if NET`.
```

> ### Persisting pre-requisites

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
### Persisting prerequisites
```

We need to require a minimum version for the iOS/Android/Windows SDKs.

* Probably like how we did WinForms/WPF
    - WinForms/WPF uses a framework reference which by design doesn't have a
      version number
    - We'd need something with a version number

> This work is captured [in this document](https://microsoft.sharepoint.com/:w:/t/DotNetTeam/EavsPfFy7lFLh7eQrdMN8QwBl05cGLPwrSzJeT8vEu32mw?e=knNQ6W).

Reviewer 16: I can't access this document, it says:

> This link is only available to internal users 

Should the document be made public? Or should the link be removed?

Author: Right now, the doc is a brain dump and we're working on it. As soon as we have our thoughts ordered, we'll make it public, like I did with this document.

### What would we target?

Everything that is universal or portable to many platforms will target `net5`.
This includes most libraries but also ASP.NET Core and EF.

> Platform-specific libraries would target platform-specific flavors, for example,

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Platform-specific libraries would target platform-specific flavors. For example,
```

WinForms and WPF controls would target `net5-win`.

Cross-platform application models (Xamarin Forms, ASP.NET Core) and bridges
(Xamarin Essentials) would at least target `net5` but might also additionally
target platform-specific flavors to light-up more APIs or features. This
approach is also called bait & switch.

### Target Framework Names

There are some places in the IDE where targeting information is displayed:

![](pic03.png)
![](pic04.png)
![](pic05.png)
![](pic06.png)

| Rule                                                                                         | Affected UI                                                        |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | For most UI, we should use the TFM short name (e.g. `netcoreapp3.1`, `net5`, or `net5-ios`). | Solution Explorer Editor, Context Switcherm Debug Context Switcher |

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
| For most UI, we should use the TFM short name (for example, `netcoreapp3.1`, `net5`, or `net5-ios`). | Solution Explorer Editor, Context Switcherm Debug Context Switcher |
```

> | For cases, where we use branded display names, we should use the name .NET 5.                | Project Properties                                                 |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| For cases where we use branded display names, we should use the name .NET 5.                | Project Properties                                                 |
```

1.  **Number of moving pieces**. Imagine what a simple class library would look
    like that just wants to provide an abstraction over a single concept, such
    as the GPS. It would transitively depend on all OS bindings. Regardless of
    the platform you're building your application for, the output folder would
    have to include all bindings across OS platforms, with all being throwing
    implementations except for the one that your app is targeting. While we
    could build tooling (such as a linker) that could remove this and replace
    the call sites with throw statements, it seems backwards to first create
    this mess and then rely on tooling to clean it up. It would be better to
    avoid this problem by construction.

2.  **Versioning issues**. By making the OS bindings available on top of the
    .NET platform the consumer is now able to upgrade the .NET platform and the
    OS bindings independently, which makes it hard to explain what combinations
    are supported. In practice, the OS bindings will want to depend on .NET
    types which might change over time (think `Task<T>` or `Span<T>)`, so not
    every combination can work.

> We believe it's much easier if we enable code to use multi-targeting (i.e.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
We believe it's much easier if we enable code to use multi-targeting (that is,
```

compile the same code for multiple platforms, like we do today.

### Is .NET 5 a superset of .NET Framework 4.x?

No, .NET 5 isn't a *superset* of .NET Framework. However, .NET 5 is
the *successor* of both .NET Core 3.x as well as .NET Framework 4.x. Starting
with .NET Core 3, you can build the same kind of workloads that you can with
.NET Framework. Some of the tech has changed, but that's the way it's [going to
be forever](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/net-core-is-the-future-of-net/).
The remaining delta will never be closed. Existing apps can stay on .NET
Framework and will be supported, but we already said we'll no longer add new
features to it.

Thus, new apps should start on .NET Core. By branding it as .NET 5, this

> recommendation is much more obvious to both, existing customers, as well as new

Reviewer 15: > 
```suggestion
recommendation is much more obvious to both existing customers and new
```

customers.

### Why are the OS specific flavors not versioned by the OS?

There are two reasons why this isn't desirable:

1.  **It results a combinatorial explosion**. A TFM in the form of `net5-win7`
    would (syntactically) make any combination of .NET and OS possible. This
    raises the question which combinations are supported, which puts us back
    into having to provide the customer with a decoder ring.

2.  **It can make asset selection ill-defined**. Suppose the project is
    targeting `net7-win10`. The package offers `net5-win10` and `net6-win7`. Now
    neither asset would be better.

Developers will want to target different OS versions from a single code
base/NuGet package, but that doesn't mean they will need to use multi-targeting.
Multi-targeting is a very heavy hammer. Yes, many people are using it to target

> different versions of .NET (e.g. `net45` vs `net461`). But that's not

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
different versions of .NET (for example, `net45` vs `net461`). But that's not
```

necessarily because `#if` is the better experience, it's because it's simply not

> possible any other way, due to .NET runtime constraints (i.e. assembly

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
possible any other way, due to .NET runtime constraints (that is, assembly
```

references and type/member references need to be resolved by the JIT). This
problem doesn't exist for OS APIs. Developers can generally build a single
binary for multiple versions of an operating system. The calls to APIs
introduced in later versions must be guarded, but this is generally understood,
and we have some limited tooling already with plans to extend it.

However, we do want to allow the developer to express a minimum version they
require for the OS. It will likely be a property in the project file that is
being persisted in the resulting NuGet package as well. There is a separate doc

> that we're working on.

Reviewer 9: This is just confusing, above you say "because combinatorial explosion" and then state, we'll going to do it anyway. I think we should map `-win10` -> `Target_Platform_Identifer`/`Target_Platform_Version` and skip the profile concept all together.

Author: The point I was trying to make is that we don't want to support OS versioning as part of the friendly name.

### Why is there no TFM for Blazor?

Based on conversations with the Blazor team we decided to not create a TFM for
WASM in the browser. That's because Blazor wants agility where code can
transparently work on client and server. Thus, they will continue to use `net5`.
The browser-specific APIs will be delivered as a NuGet package, using RIDs to
provide a throwing and non-throwing implementation. Other parties will have to
do the same thing.

### ~~Why is the TFM called net5-browser and net5-wasm?~~

*No longer applicable as we won't have a TFM for Blazor.*

WASM isn't a platform (in the OS sense) as much as it is an instruction set
architecture, so it's better to think of WASM as something like x86/x64. So, it
might not make sense to define net5-wasm. Rather, it would make more sense to
define net5-browser. The rationale is that the browser will run WASM in a
sandboxed environment which equates to having different native API sets.

> Any host that controls the JS runtime (e.g. node.js) could decide to expose

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Any host that controls the JS runtime (for example, Node.js) could decide to expose
```

different/less constrained OS, which might give rise to other TFMs, such as
net5-node.

### What about native dependencies?

We don't plan to support varying API surface based on runtime characteristics
(x86/x64, AOT/JIT etc). This will continue to be supported via
the `runtime/<RID>` folder.

### Will the new TFMs simplify the project files too?

[@cartermp](https://github.com/cartermp) asked:

> Does specifiying `net5.0-win` obviate the current three things you need to
> specify?
>
> * netcoreapp3.x
> * Desktop SDK attribute
> * UseWindowsForms/UseWPF
>
> IOW are we going to have to support both formats moving forward? What about
> converting apps?

> Generally it does not. The idea I've heard is that all project types will be

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Generally, it does not. The idea I've heard is that all project types will be
```

unified to use `Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk"` in order to make multi-targeting

> easier. Customizations (e.g. specific targets and references) would be brought

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
easier. Customizations (for example, specific targets and references) would be brought
```

in via `UseXxx` properties, akin to how Windows Forms and WPF work in .NET Core
today. The reason is that in many cases the TFM alone isn't specific enough to
decide what kind of app are you building:

* `net5`. Is a class library/console app, an ASP.NET Core app, or a Blazor app?
* `net5-win`. Are you building a Windows Forms app, a WPF app, or a UWP app? Are
  you using both Windows Forms and WPF?

The nice thing about properties is that they naturally compose. If certain

> combinations aren't possible, they can relativelly easily be blocked.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
combinations aren't possible, they can relatively easily be blocked.
```

> combinations aren't possible, they can relativelly easily be blocked.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
combinations aren't possible, they can relatively easily be blocked.
```

However, at this point it's still unclear whether the SDK unification will work
this way. One concern was that SDKs also bring in new item groups and might have
conflicting defaults for properties; this works today because the SDK can bring
in .props before the project file. When we rely on properties in the project

> file, we need to bring those in the .targets (i.e. the bottom of the project

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
file, we need to bring those in the .targets (that is, the bottom of the project
```

> file). WHile not impossible, this might force us to have knowledge in the base

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
file). While not impossible, this might force us to have knowledge in the base
```

| net5.0-android  | xamarin.android                                            |                                   |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5.0)                   |                                   |
| net5.0-ios      | xamarin.ios                                                |                                   |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5.0)                   |                                   |
| net5.0-macos    | xamarin.macos                                              |                                   |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5.0)                   |                                   |
| net5.0-tvos     | xamarin.tvos                                               |                                   |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5.0)                   |                                   |
| net5.0-watchos  | xamarin.watchos                                            |                                   |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5.0)                   |                                   |

> | net5.0-win      | netcoreapp1..3.1                                           | WinForms + WPF                    |

Reviewer 17: i'd imagine this should be "net5.0-windows". this sticks out as the only abbreviation...and it should be the brand we want to treat as nicely as the others.

Author: That's a good point. I've modelled it off of the RID we currently use. I can go either way. @ericstj, what are your thoughts on this?

Reviewer 18: I'd prefer win, for the same argument: It's already used in placed like RID, and we all know what it means.

Reviewer 17: RID is much less common or visible than TFM. i'm not worried about confusion. Just don't know why we'd abbreviate windows, but not android, macos, etc...

Author: I've changed it to `windows`.

  it's reasonable either way, just different tradeoffs. I'm amenable to exposing
  a property function, but maybe we should go down the road of not doing it at
  first.

We're going to map the new entries as follows:

| Framework      | Identifier    | Version | Profile |
|----------------|---------------|---------|---------|
| net48          | .NETFramework | 4.8     |         |
| net5.0         | .NETCoreApp   | 5.0     |         |
| net5.0-android | .NETCoreApp   | 5.0     | android |
| net5.0-ios     | .NETCoreApp   | 5.0     | ios     |
| net5.0-win     | .NETCoreApp   | 5.0     | win     |

_**Open Issue**. Please note that `net5.0`+ will map the TFI to `.NETCoreApp`.
We need to announce this change so that package authors with custom .props and
.targets are prepared. Link to DavKean’s doc on how to do it._

_**Open Issue**. We should try to keep the TFI out of the .nuspec file. It seems
NuGet uses the long form `.NETFramework,Version=4.5` in the dependency groups.
We may want to change NuGet to allow the friendly name there as well and update
our packaging tools to re-write to friendly name on pack._

Specifically:

> * **We'll continue to use .NETCoreApp as the TFI**. This reduces the number of

Reviewer 19: Seems a shame to be stuck with a confusing legacy name. How widely is the string ".NETCoreApp" used in the SDK?

Reviewer 20: It's gonna cause a whole lot of confusion. It's better to remove the whole `TargetFramework` concept altogether. Just go with `Runtime` (`Platform`/`Machine`). It's much simpler and easy to understand. My examples are not a definitive design but it can go from there...

My solution is simple. As long as you target specific `Runtime` (`Platform`/`Machine`), the libs produced will work on that. The `TargetFrameworkVersion` will be there as the first two version numbers (major, minor) in `RuntimeVersion` if we follow Semantic Versioning strictly.

See https://github.com/dotnet/designs/pull/92#issuecomment-587106124

Author: We discussed this and concluded that keeping the current TFI is the best solution.

represents a bitmap and is constructed via OS-provided data types. Ada uses
`#if` to expose different constructors on different platforms:

```C#
public static class SkiaSharpImage
{
#if ANDROID
    public SkiaSharpImage(Android.Media.Image nativeImage) { /* ... */  }
#endif

#if IOS
    public SkiaSharpImage(NSImage nativeImage) { /* ... */ }
#endif

#if WINDOWS
    public SkiaSharpImage(Windows.Media.BitmapImage nativeImage) { /* ... */ }
#endif
}
```

## Requirements

### Goals

* Use naming that aligns with product strategy
* Merge .NET Core and .NET Standard into a single concept
* Developers should be able to understand compatibility relationships without
  having to consult a mapping table.
* Provide compatibility with existing concepts and NuGet packages
* It would be great to get this into .NET 5 Preview 1

### Non-Goals

* Replace TFMs or expand runtime identifiers (RIDs)
* Support multi-targeting between OS versions

## Design

| TFM             | Compatible With                                            | Comments                          |
|-----------------|------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|

> | net5.0          | net1..4 (with NU1701 warning)                              | No WinForms or WPF                |

Reviewer 17: I'd imagine we want this warning for net5.0 -> netcoreapp3.1 w/ frameworkrefs to also apply for most "profiles" as well. Except, when net5.0-windows is used, i'd imagine we don't want that warning.

Author: Hmm... I think `netcoreapp3.1` w/ the desktop framework ref should be a warning for `net5.0` and fail for all OS flavors except `net5.0-windows`. If the project says a specific operating system that isn't Windows, then it will for sure not work. If it's `net5.0` then it can work if the code only runs on Windows. Does this make sense?

> |                 | netcoreapp1..3.1 (warning when WinForms/WPF is referenced) |                                   |

Reviewer 17: @terrajobst  - can you suggest the warning text for net5.0 -> netcoreapp3.1 w/ framework ref bringing in WPF?

Reviewer 17: NU1703 draft text:
Package 'x 1.0.0' was restored using a targetFramework with a FrameworkReference in 'Microsoft.WindowsDesktop.App' instead of the project target framework '.NETCoreApp,Version=v5.0'. This package may not be fully compatible with your project.

```
  <data name="Log_ImportsFallbackWarning" xml:space="preserve">
    <value>Package '{0}' was restored using '{1}' instead of the project target framework '{2}'. This package may not be fully compatible with your project.</value>
  </data>
  <data name="Log_UsingWindowsDesktopFrameworkRefWarning" xml:space="preserve">
    <value>Package '{0}' was restored using a targetFramework with a FrameworkReference in '{2}' instead of the project target framework '{1}'. This package may not be fully compatible with your project.</value>
  </data>
```

Author: @rrelyea 

I have to admit that I don't understand this message 😄 

How about this:

> Package 'x 1.0.0' was restored using 'netcoreapp3.1' with a framework reference to 'Microsoft.WindowsDesktop.App', which isn't available on all operating systems, which means this package might not be fully compatible with your project. To limit your project to Windows, change your target framework from `net6.0` to `net6.0-windows`.

|                 | netstandard1..2.1                                          |                                   |
| net5.0-android  | xamarin.android                                            |                                   |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5.0)                   |                                   |
| net5.0-ios      | xamarin.ios                                                |                                   |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5.0)                   |                                   |

> | net5.0-macos    | xamarin.macos                                              |                                   |

Reviewer 21: Nit: The previous name is `xamarin.mac`, not `xamarin.macos`.

Author: Thanks, fixed.

  various times) it'd be great to just expose that. With the logic in NuGet,
  it's reasonable either way, just different tradeoffs. I'm amenable to exposing
  a property function, but maybe we should go down the road of not doing it at
  first.

We're going to map the new entries as follows:

| Framework      | Identifier    | Version | Profile |
|----------------|---------------|---------|---------|
| net48          | .NETFramework | 4.8     |         |
| net5.0         | .NETCoreApp   | 5.0     |         |
| net5.0-android | .NETCoreApp   | 5.0     | android |
| net5.0-ios     | .NETCoreApp   | 5.0     | ios     |
| net5.0-win     | .NETCoreApp   | 5.0     | win     |

_**Open Issue**. Please note that `net5.0`+ will map the TFI to `.NETCoreApp`.
We need to announce this change so that package authors with custom .props and
.targets are prepared. Link to DavKean’s doc on how to do it._

_**Open Issue**. We should try to keep the TFI out of the .nuspec file. It seems
NuGet uses the long form `.NETFramework,Version=4.5` in the dependency groups.
We may want to change NuGet to allow the friendly name there as well and update

> our packaging tools to re-write to friendly name on pack._

Author: In MSBuild there are already various properties that will express that; see my section on how they are expanded. My comment here is my about the encoding issue in NuGet where it uses the moniker, which, as you pointed out lacks the OS flavor. Hence the suggestion to allow the friendly name, which does. Alternatively NuGet could add separate a attribute.

that are also being persisted in the resulting NuGet package as well. It's not
decided on whether violating the perquisites will always be an error. For
example, we could decide to make *Minimum OS API Level* an error (because it
might result in compilation errors) while making *Minimum OS version* a warning
(because the consuming project could guard the method calls into the library).

There is a [separate doc][os-versioning] that we're working on.

### Why is there no TFM for Blazor?

Based on conversations with the Blazor team we decided to not create a TFM for
WASM in the browser. That's because Blazor wants agility where code can
transparently work on client and server. Thus, they will continue to use
`net5.0`. The browser-specific APIs will be delivered as a NuGet package, using
RIDs to provide a throwing and non-throwing implementation. Other parties will
have to do the same thing.

### ~~Why is the TFM called net5.0-browser and net5.0-wasm?~~

*No longer applicable as we won't have a TFM for Blazor.*

WASM isn't a platform (in the OS sense) as much as it is an instruction set
architecture, so it's better to think of WASM as something like x86/x64. So, it

> might not make sense to define `net5.0-wasm`. Rather, it would make more sense to

Author: We currently don't have a full AOT story for WASM (i.e. we don't support taking arbitrary IL and convert it to WASM). Blazor interprets IL. Right now, WAS will be handled like x86 in NuGet in that it's expressed as a RID.

in via `UseXxx` properties, akin to how Windows Forms and WPF work in .NET Core
today. The reason is that in many cases the TFM alone isn't specific enough to
decide what kind of app are you building:

* `net5.0`. Is a class library/console app, an ASP.NET Core app, or a Blazor app?
* `net5.0-win`. Are you building a Windows Forms app or a WPF app? Are you using
  both Windows Forms and WPF or just one?

The nice thing about properties is that they naturally compose. If certain
combinations aren't possible, they can relatively easily be blocked.

However, at this point it's still unclear whether the SDK unification will work
this way. One concern was that SDKs also bring in new item groups and might have
conflicting defaults for properties; this works today because the SDK can bring
in .props before the project file. When we rely on properties in the project
file, we need to bring those in the .targets (that is, the bottom of the project
file). While not impossible, this might force us to have knowledge in the base
SDK that can't be easily extended via optional components.
[@mhutch](https://github.com/mhutch) is working on a document specifically

> around SDK convergence.

Author: As the comment suggested, this is out of scope for this proposal.

> around SDK convergence.

Reviewer 20: Just an FYI. 😉

file which currently looks like this:

```XML
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">

  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>net5.0-ios13.0</TargetFramework>
  </PropertyGroup>

  ...

</Project>
```

He modifies the `<TargetFramework>` to be `net5.0-ios14.0`.

### Lighting up on later OS versions

Miguel doesn't want to cut off his users who are currently on iOS 13, so he
wants to continue to have his application work on iOS 13 as well. To achieve
that, Miguel modifies the project file by adding
`<TargetPlatformMinimumVersion>`:

```XML
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">

  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>net5.0-ios14.0</TargetFramework>
    <TargetPlatformMinimumVersion>13.0</TargetPlatformMinimumVersion>
  </PropertyGroup>

  ...

</Project>
```

However, since Miguel also uses the new `NSFizBuzz` API that Apple added in iOS
14, he also modifies his source code to check for the operating system version
before calling it:

```C#
public void OnClick(object sender, EventArgs e)
{
    if (Environment.OSVersion.Version >= new Version(14, 0))
    {
        NSFizBuzz();  
    }
}
```

### Consuming a library with a higher `TargetPlatformMinimumVersion`

> After using `NSFizzBuzz` directly for a while, Miguel notices that these OS APIs

Reviewer 22: The way target framework compatibility is defined right now, there's no `half-way` compatibility between framework and this changes that. 

We should consider this to be a separate concept from target framework

Reviewer 22: Addressed in the meeting. 

TargetPlatformMinimumVersion is not part of the TargetFramework friendly name, only TargetPlatformVersion is.

Author: Exactly.

| net5.0-tvos     | xamarin.tvos                                               |                                   |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5.0)                   |                                   |
| net5.0-watchos  | xamarin.watchos                                            |                                   |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5.0)                   |                                   |
| net5.0-windows  | netcoreapp1..3.1                                           | WinForms + WPF                    |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5.0)                   |                                   |
| Tizen, Unity... | Will follow the Xamarin model                              |                                   |

_**Open Issue**. In case of Xamarin, there is a discussion of whether the
convergence with .NET Core will be a breaking change for existing NuGet packages
(for example, there is a desire to change their namespaces). In that case, we
should not map it to the existing TFM as that would be pointless._

> _**Open Issue**. Will the above scheme work for iPad?_

Reviewer 23: So far iPadOS is a marketing (only) term - the same SDK/tools/libraries are being used.
That might change in the future... but it's tricky (even for Apple) to migrate projects (single binary) built for both _OS_

### OS versions

The TFM will support an optional OS version, such as:

* `net5.0-ios`
* `net5.0-ios12.0`

A TFM without an OS version will be interpreted as the lowest OS version that

> was supported by the corresponding `netX.Y` version.

Reviewer 23: Based on the text after the note, that would be **highest** (not lowest)

Why ? as of today Xamarin.iOS supports iOS 7.0 (and later) up to iOS 13.3.

We do not want `net-5.0-ios` to default to iOS 7.0 (the lowest).

The current behaviour is to default to the **highest** (13.3) and have the developer guard newer API calls (when needed) to ensure the code works on all versions of iOS they wish to support.

Reviewer 23: That also means a lot of `net5.0-ios-*.*` TFM - about 29 today.

https://github.com/xamarin/xamarin-macios/blob/master/Versions-ios.plist.in#L11

Author: > Based on the text after the note, that would be **highest** (not lowest)
> 
> Why ? as of today Xamarin.iOS supports iOS 7.0 (and later) up to iOS 13.3.

I think lowest might not be the best way to think about. It's the *first* version that was bundled with a given version of .NET. For example, say .NET 5 will initially bundle iOS 13 and with a later updated iOS 14. .NET 6 might bundle iOS 14 and then in a later version iOS 16. The spec prescribes the meaning as follows:

* `net5-ios` is equivalent to `net5-ios13`
* `net6-ios` is equivalent to `net5-ios14`

Does that make more sense?

Reviewer 23: yup, it's what I kind of expected 👍

> *Note: One assumption here is that developers can always compile for the
> latest OS API set and run on older OS versions so long they guard method calls
> correctly. This is how P/Invokes, WinRT, iOS, and Android bindings work
> today.*

For example, say that when .NET 5 ships, the version of iOS that we include
bindings for is iOS 13. That would mean that `net5.0-ios` and `net5.0-ios13.0`
mean the exact same thing. Now lets say that Apple ships a new iOS 14 before
.NET 6 is ready. We'd release a new version of the .NET 5 SDK that adds support
for iOS 14. On machines with that SDK `net5.0-ios` still means `net5.0-ios13.0`.

Please note that this mapping is specific for `net5.0`. When .NET 6 ships, we
could decide that `net6.0-ios` means `net6.0-ios14.0`. But even when you use the
.NET 6 SDK, when targeting .NET 5, `net5.0-ios` also still means

> `net5.0-ios13.0`. So these mappings are immutable.

Author: > Shouldn't OS bindings (if its only going to project the APIs) be independent of .NET framework version?

They can't be independent of the .NET version. We've tried this before and it results in breaks. Consider that the OS bindings are expressed in .NET. What API surface do the bindings have access to? For example, at some point we added `ValueTask` and `ValueTask<T>`. If the bindings are independent of the .NET version number then they can't reliably take dependencies on newer APIs.

We have done this to simplify the experience for application models where the OS
version is largely irrelevant, for example WinForms and WPF. Whether or not the
template will put an OS version in the `<TargetFramework>` is up to each
application model. Based on conversations, it seems we'll be landing on this:

| TFM             | Project file includes OS version
|-----------------|---------------------------------
| net5.0-android  | Yes
| net5.0-ios      | Yes
| net5.0-macos    | Yes
| net5.0-tvos     | Yes
| net5.0-watchos  | Yes
| net5.0-windows  | No

Please note that by being able to put the OS version into the TFM one can also
multi-target between OS versions:

```XML
<PropertyGroup>

>   <TargetFrameworks>net5.0-ios13.0;net5.0-ios14.0</TargetFrameworks>

Reviewer 20: This a combination of both `TargetFramework` which is `net5.0` and `TargetPlatform` which is `ios14.0`.

It is no longer relevant to call it just TargetFrameworks, we should opt for a simpler name, e.g.: `BuildTargets`/`TargetProfiles`/`Targets`, etc... I'm not good at naming things, sorry.

Author: A "profile" has a very specific meaning, so we can't use that.

> This a combination of both `TargetFramework` which is `net5.0` and `TargetPlatform` which is `ios14.0`.

The point of this proposal is to add platform information to the TFM friendly name so that it's easier to talk about. This isn't a bug, that's the feature! 😄

Reviewer 20: I get what it represents but... 

When I was talking about this to my colleagues who were either windows guys or new to .NET, they kept asking about how it was an extern call to platform APIs and not something that's already in the .NET BCLs or a superset (of BCLs) like you mentioned.

**They were confused**. When I told them to think it as a separate lib that's present only on that platform (indicated by platform id/version, like WinRT), they were in the clear.

Before that, they were asking all sorts of Qs about versioning and compatability but after mentioning WinRT, they sorta understood.

</PropertyGroup>
```

However, it's a bit misleading to think of the OS version number as the version
of the operating system you're running on. Rather, it's the operating system's
API you're compiling for.

### Mapping to properties

These are the relevant MSBuild properties:

| Property                              | Meaning                         | Examples                         |
|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| `TargetFramework` (TFM)               | The friendly name               | `net4`, `netcoreapp3.0`          |
| `TargetFrameworkIdentifier` (TFI)     | The long name                   | `.NETFramework` or `.NETCoreApp` |
| `TargetFrameworkVersion` (TFV)        | The version number              | `2`, `3.0`, `3.1`                |
| `TargetFrameworkProfile` (TFP)        | The profile                     | `Client` or `Profile124`         |

> | `TargetPlatformIdentifier` (TPI)      | The OS platform                 | `ios`, `android`, `windows`      |

Author: I don't have strong opinions here; I just used the stuff after the dash without the version as it doesn't require any transcoding. @rainersigwald @dsplaisted, any thoughts on this?

> | `TargetPlatformIdentifier` (TPI)      | The OS platform                 | `ios`, `android`, `windows`      |

Reviewer 24: No strong opinion either, but I lean toward "proper casing". MSBuild is often case-insensitive (but not often enough that you can just say "MSBuild is case insenstive" 😬).

> | `TargetPlatformIdentifier` (TPI)      | The OS platform                 | `ios`, `android`, `windows`      |

Author: Works for me, but does mean that those need to be transcoded (rather than extracted by parsing). /cc @mhutch

> and VS insertions. If the logic were in a separate package (we've talked about
> pushing it down to the framework at various times) it'd be great to just
> expose that. With the logic in NuGet, it's reasonable either way, just
> different tradeoffs. I'm amenable to exposing a property function, but maybe
> we should go down the road of not doing it at first." --
> [@rainersigwald](https://github.com/rainersigwald)

### NuGet pack behavior

We need to update the .nuspec format to allow embedding target platform
information per TFM. For that, I propose to add a `platforms` element under
`metadata`. For each `netX.Y-{os}{version}`, it should contain a `platform` that
ties the TFM as specified to their corresponding `TargetPlatformVersion` and
`TargetPlatformMinimumVersion` entries:

```xml
<package xmlns="...">
  <metadata>
    <id>ClassLibrary3</id>
    <version>1.0.0</version>
    <authors>ClassLibrary3</authors>
    <owners>ClassLibrary3</owners>
    <requireLicenseAcceptance>false</requireLicenseAcceptance>
    <description>Package Description</description>
    <platforms>
      <platform targetFramework="net5.0-ios"

>                 platformVersion="14.0"

Author: > This means that the Bindings will be delivered as `FrameworkReferences`?

This section just records the OS versions; it doesn't express how they are being acquired.

> It's obvious that $MSFT can't support all the OS variants out there, Is there any way for 3rd party to ship OS bindings and runtime?

Right now the answer is no; we might add generic extension points for 3rd parties. But the set of them is very small and we already work with them.

>                 platformVersion="14.0"

Reviewer 20: I previously looked into some micro-kernels on how would I develop .NET apps on top of it for IoT scenarios. That's why I was asking.

   possible. This raises the question which combinations are supported, which
   puts us back into having to provide the customer with a decoder ring.

2. **It can make asset selection ill-defined**. Suppose the project is targeting
   `net7.0-windows10`. The package offers `net5.0-windows10.0` and
   `net6.0-windows7.0`. Now neither asset would be better.

3. **A single version isn't enough**. Logically, you need at least two version
   numbers to support OS targeting:

      * *Minimum OS API Level*. Consumers of the library must use an SDK that
        support this version, or a higher version. This allows library authors
        to use types from the OS bindings in their public API surface without
        causing type resolution issues for the consumer.

      * *Minimum OS version*. For OS calls, it's common to guard OS calls with
        version checks. This allows library authors to light up for later OS
        versions without having to produce multiple binaries. In order for that
        to be sound, a project generally cannot have lower version than whatever
        its libraries support, unless the consumer guards their calls into that
        library.
  

>    Some platforms, such as Android, also have the notion of a *targeted OS

Reviewer 20: Windows also have `MinVersion`, `MaxVersion` and `MaxVersionTested`.

Author: > Windows also have `MinVersion`, `MaxVersion` and `MaxVersionTested`.

Android also has a third version. @mhutch, should we standarize properties beyond `TargetPlatformMinimumVersion`?

Reviewer 20: I think Android's Targeted OS version is equivalent to Windows' `MaxVersionTested`.

for any of the platforms that .NET provides support for. The branding we
currently have makes no sense to them. To find documentation and tutorials, the
only two things a developer should need to know is the name and version of their
technology stack.

Let's contrast this with some of the NuGet packages that developers have to
author for today's world:

![](pic02.png)

There are a lot of names and version numbers. Knowing who is compatible with who
is impossible without a decoder ring. We've simplified this greatly with .NET
Standard, but this still requires a table that maps .NET Standard versions to
.NET implementation versions.

The proposal is to reuse the existing `net` TFM and model OS-specific APIs on
top via a new syntax:

* `net5.0`. This TFM is for code that runs everywhere. It combines and replaces
  the `netcoreapp` and `netstandard` names. This TFM will generally only include
  technologies that work cross-platform (modulo pragmatic concessions, like we
  already did in .NET Standard).

* `net5.0-android`, `net5.0-ios`, and `net5.0-windows`. These TFMs represent OS
  specific flavors of .NET 5 that include `net5.0` plus OS-specific bindings.

> NuGet should use this nex syntax to automatically understand that `net5.0` can

Reviewer 25: ```suggestion
NuGet should use this new syntax to automatically understand that `net5.0` can
```

`NET5_0_OR_HIGHER`? This could simplify `#if` logic._

### What would we target?

Everything that is universal or portable to many platforms will target `net5.0`.
This includes most libraries but also ASP.NET Core and EF.

Platform-specific libraries would target platform-specific flavors. For example,
WinForms and WPF controls would target `net5.0-windows`.

Cross-platform application models (Xamarin Forms, ASP.NET Core) and bridge packs
(Xamarin Essentials) would at least target `net5.0` but might also additionally
target platform-specific flavors to light-up more APIs or features. This
approach is also called bait & switch.

### Target Framework Names

There are some places in the IDE where targeting information is displayed:

![](pic03.png)

![](pic04.png)

![](pic05.png)

![](pic06.png)

| Rule                                                                                                        | Affected UI                                                        |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | For most UI, we should use the TFM friendly name (for example, `netcoreapp3.1`, `net5.0`, or `net5.0-ios`). | Solution Explorer Editor, Context Switcher, Debug Context Switcher |

Reviewer 25: ```suggestion
| For most UI, we should use the TFM friendly name (for example, `netcoreapp3.1`, `net5.0`, or `net5.0-ios`). | Solution Explorer, Editor Context Switcher, Debug Context Switcher |
```

| net5.0-ios      | xamarin.ios                                                |                                   |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5.0)                   |                                   |
| net5.0-macos    | xamarin.mac                                                |                                   |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5.0)                   |                                   |
| net5.0-tvos     | xamarin.tvos                                               |                                   |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5.0)                   |                                   |
| net5.0-watchos  | xamarin.watchos                                            |                                   |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5.0)                   |                                   |
| net5.0-windows  | netcoreapp1..3.1                                           | WinForms + WPF                    |
|                 | (+everything else inherited from net5.0)                   |                                   |

> | Tizen, Unity... | Will follow the Xamarin model                              |                                   |

Reviewer 26: I'm wondering how Unity fits in here. Ideally, we'd like to provide an implementation that matches a proper subset of .NET 5. There will be some APIs we don't want to support. Can our implementation provide "hints" to Roslyn and IDEs about what APIs are not supported? Or should we provide a `net5.0-unity` TFM?

Note that I'm not talking about additional APIs that Unity exposes here (e.g. our `NativeArray` or  `NativeSlice`), but rather just about the BCL API.

Author: > I'm wondering how Unity fits in here. Ideally, we'd like to provide an implementation that matches a proper subset of .NET 5. There will be some APIs we don't want to support. Can our implementation provide "hints" to Roslyn and IDEs about what APIs are not supported? Or should we provide a `net5.0-unity` TFM?

By mid-next week, I'll have a spec for how we're planning on detecting platform issues like this from a Roslyn analyzer.

> Note that I'm not talking about additional APIs that Unity exposes here (e.g. our `NativeArray` or `NativeSlice`), but rather just about the BCL API.

Should we hop on a conf call next week to discuss how Unity might fit in? Based on your response to .NET Standard 2.1 I figured it's a bit too early to have that conversation, but given your interest it looks like that was a wrong assumption on my end.

Reviewer 26: > Should we hop on a conf call next week to discuss how Unity might fit in? Based on your response to .NET Standard 2.1 I figured it's a bit too early to have that conversation, but given your interest it looks like that was a wrong assumption on my end.

Yes, I'd be happy to discuss this next week. We're not quite ready to take action yet, but I suspect things will be moving in the next few months, so I'm thinking about a plan now.

Author: @joshpeterson and me will chat tomorrow.

| net5.0-watchos  | Yes
| net5.0-windows  | No

Please note that by being able to put the OS version into the TFM one can also
multi-target between OS versions:

```XML
<PropertyGroup>
  <TargetFrameworks>net5.0-ios13.0;net5.0-ios14.0</TargetFrameworks>
</PropertyGroup>
```

However, it's a bit misleading to think of the OS version number as the version
of the operating system you're running on. Rather, it's the operating system's
API you're compiling for.

### Mapping to properties

These are the relevant MSBuild properties:

| Property                              | Meaning                         | Examples                         |
|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| `TargetFramework` (TFM)               | The friendly name               | `net4`, `netcoreapp3.0`          |
| `TargetFrameworkIdentifier` (TFI)     | The long name                   | `.NETFramework` or `.NETCoreApp` |
| `TargetFrameworkVersion` (TFV)        | The version number              | `2`, `3.0`, `3.1`                |
| `TargetFrameworkProfile` (TFP)        | The profile                     | `Client` or `Profile124`         |

> | `TargetPlatformIdentifier` (TPI)      | The OS platform                 | `ios`, `android`, `windows`      |

Reviewer 27: Should the examples use same casing as the table below?

Author: Totally

> | `TargetPlatformIdentifier` (TPI)      | The OS platform                 | `iOS`, `Android`, `Windows`      |

Reviewer 28: Will this use a different case than the TFM?

Reviewer 20: Yes!

<details>
<summary>More info</summary>

`TFM` is `TargetFrameworkMoniker` which is `.NETFramework,Version=4.0,Profile=Client` which is a very long name that is written to assemblies as `TargetFrameworkAttribute`.

What you're referring to is `TargetFramework` which is a short name or a friendly name and those will be in small case. This one is an `Identifier` which should be in case similar to `TFI` mentioned above.

</details>

Author: What @Nirmal4G said

approach is also called bait & switch.

### TFMs in the UI

There are some places in the IDE where targeting information is displayed:

![](pic03.png)

![](pic04.png)

![](pic05.png)

![](pic06.png)

| Rule                                                                                                        | Affected UI                                                        |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| For most UI, we should use the TFM friendly name (for example, `netcoreapp3.1`, `net5.0`, or `net5.0-ios`). | Solution Explorer, Editor Context Switcher, Debug Context Switcher |
| For cases where we use branded display names, we should use the name .NET 5.                                | Project Properties                                                 |

### Related work

To support multi-targeting end-to-end the TFM unification isn't enough. We also
need to unify the SDKs between .NET Core, Windows desktop, Xamarin, and
maybe ASP.NET Core. Without it, multi-targeting doesn't work without having to use

> 3rd party tools, such as Oren's

Reviewer 25: ```suggestion
3rd party tools, such as Claire's
```

Reviewer 20: Who is **Claire**?

Reviewer 15: @Nirmal4G She changed her name from Oren to Claire. I tremendously respect her courage and transparency.

Reviewer 11: Do I hear trans rights?

Reviewer 15: @Happypig375 Doesn't matter what you hear as long as what you say is gracious.

Reviewer 20: I've seen/heard Oren's talks, pardon my ignorance, but I thought...🤯 Man, the world is **VERY** small!

_Good for ~~him~~ her !_

Author: @Happypig375 I can't tell whether your comment is meant to be funny or snarky. Just know that we have zero tolerance for transphobic behavior or any other violations of our [code of conduct](https://dotnetfoundation.org/code-of-conduct). As @jnm2 said, Claire deserves a tremendous amount of respect for her courage of sharing her story. We should be supportive as members of the .NET community and fellow human beings. I've marked your comment as off topic.

Reviewer 20: > Who is **Claire**?

Just this morning, I was looking at `MSBuild.Sdk.Extras` repo, reading ~~his~~ her blogs about Reference assemblies... It was not yet changed then. I might be the last person and the first to witness that!

Reviewer 11: Wait, that's a real person!?

However, at this point it's still unclear whether the SDK unification will work
this way. One concern was that SDKs also bring in new item groups and might have
conflicting defaults for properties; this works today because the SDK can bring
in .props before the project file. When we rely on properties in the project
file, we need to bring those in the .targets (that is, the bottom of the project
file). While not impossible, this might force us to have knowledge in the base
SDK that can't be easily extended via optional components.
[@mhutch](https://github.com/mhutch) is working on a document specifically
around SDK convergence.

### Why is there no TFM for Linux?

The primary reason for OS specific TFMs is to vary API surface, not for varying
behavior. RIDs allow varying behavior and have support for various Linux
flavors. Specifically, TFMs aren't (primarily) meant to allow calling P/Invokes
under `#if`, most of the time that should be done by doing runtime checks or by
using RIDs. The primary reason for a TFM is to exclude large amounts of managed
representations for OS technologies (WinForms, WPF, Apple's NS APIs, Android

> etc).

Reviewer 29: I have a question about this. Doesn't .NET 5 support [mono WinForms](https://www.mono-project.com/docs/gui/winforms/) implementation or [GTK#](https://www.mono-project.com/docs/gui/gtksharp/)?

Author: No. .NET 5's WinForms is the open source & ported version of .NET Framework's WinForms implementation and is Windows only. We have no plans to make it cross-platform. This decision was based on input from the Mono folks who wrote the GTK implementation. We want to tackle cross-platform UI, but not by porting a Windows-only design because it's never going to be great and will always remain a very leaky abstraction.

Reviewer 29: So, it means WinForms app running on Mono can't be ported to .NET 5 and have to keep using Mono.
Okay, Thank you for your answer.

_**Open Issue**. Will the above scheme work for iPad?_

_**Open Issue**. Can we use a syntax that differentiates revving the bindings

> from the OS?, such as `net5.0-ios13.0-r1` or `net5.0-ios13.0A`?_

Author: We're still debating this. We don't want to play tricks by forcing people to add packages -- the point of this feature is to expose the OS APIs by changing the TFM alone. This ensures that that the OS bindings are also compatible with the .NET platform API surface, which we learned we can't do well when shipping these kind of sets via packages.

> we should go down the road of not doing it at first." --
> [@rainersigwald](https://github.com/rainersigwald)

### MSBuild version comparisons

In SDK-style projects there are two kinds of MSBuild files that are
automatically included into each project:

* `*.props`: These files are included at the top of the user's project file and
  are used to define a set of default properties that the user's project file
  can use.

* `*.targets`. These files are included at the bottom of the user's project
  file, usually meant to define build targets and additional properties/items
  that need to depend on properties defined by the user.

> Furthermore, MSBuild has a two pass evaluation model: first, it evaluates all

Reviewer 20: Properties -> Imports (simultaneously?)
Items
Targets <- (Properties + Items + Tasks)

Is that right?

> Furthermore, MSBuild has a two pass evaluation model: first, it evaluates all

Reviewer 24: Yes, properties and imports are considered in the same pass (so you can have an import from a path defined by a property).

The passes are:

0. Global and environment properties
1. Properties + imports
2. `ItemDefinitionGroup`s
3. Items
4. UsingTasks
5. Targets

The actual implementation: https://github.com/microsoft/msbuild/blob/00781ad1353afba25451148dba61845ac139b572/src/Build/Evaluation/Evaluator.cs#L601-L802

> Furthermore, MSBuild has a two pass evaluation model: first, it evaluates all

Author: OK, I'll reword

  </PropertyGroup>

</Project>
```

In the past, we've seen people working this around by using string processing
functions against the `TargetFramework` property, which is less than ideal.

Ideally, we'd expose functionality such that the user can do version checks:

```XML
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">

  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFrameworks>netstandard2.0;netcoreapp3.1</TargetFramework>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <PropertyGroup TargetFramework="netstandard">
    <SomeProperty>Some value that applies to all versions of .NET Standard<SomeProperty>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <PropertyGroup TargetFramework=">=netcoreapp2.0">
    <SomeProperty>Some value that applies to .NET Core 2.0 and later<SomeProperty>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <PropertyGroup TargetFramework="==net5.0-ios13.0">
    <SomeProperty>Some value that only applies to .NET 5 + iOS 13.0<SomeProperty>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <PropertyGroup TargetPlatform="windows">
    <SomeProperty>Some value that applies to all version of Windows<SomeProperty>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <PropertyGroup TargetPlatform=">=ios-12.0">
    <SomeProperty>Some value that applies to iOS 12.0 and later<SomeProperty>
  </PropertyGroup>

</Project>
```

> The idea is:

Author: https://github.com/microsoft/msbuild/issues/5171

* Property groups, properties, and item groups get new attributes

>   `TargetFramework` and `TargetPlatform`.

Author: Moved to: https://github.com/microsoft/msbuild/issues/5171

* The value can be prefixed with an optional conditional operator `==`, `!=`,

>   `<`, `<=`, `>`, and `>=`. If the operator is omitted, `==` is assumed.

Reviewer 24: Are these conditions sufficient, or is there a need for something like `IsCompatibleWith`?

Author: My thinking was that that's what `TargetFramework=">=net5.0"` will basically do.

Author: Moved to: https://github.com/microsoft/msbuild/issues/5171

* `TargetFramework` supports comparisons with a friendly TFM name. This can
  include an OS flavor for symmetry. If the `TargetFramework` property includes
  an OS flavor but the attribute doesn't, the comparison only applies to the TFM
  without the OS flavor. In other words a condition of
  `TargetFramework=">=net5.0"` will result in `true` if the project targets
  `net5.0`, `net6.0`, as well as `net6.0-android12.0`.

Alternatively, we could invent new syntax that allows parsing of constitutes
like this:

```XML
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">

  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFrameworks>netstandard2.0;netcoreapp3.1</TargetFramework>
  </PropertyGroup>

>   <PropertyGroup Condition="$(TargetFramework::Identifier)=='netstandard'">

Reviewer 20: What about DevOps's `$(System.Build.Tag)` like properties? Are those similar?

>   <PropertyGroup Condition="$(TargetFramework::Identifier)=='netstandard'">

Reviewer 24: They're unrelated except for using the same `$()` syntax. Azure DevOps expands variables for command lines using their own expander, then invokes the result.

>   <PropertyGroup Condition="$(TargetFramework::Identifier)=='netstandard'">

Author: Moved to: https://github.com/microsoft/msbuild/issues/5171

    <SomeProperty>Some value that applies to all versions of .NET Standard<SomeProperty>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <PropertyGroup Condition="$(TargetFramework::Name)>='netcoreapp2.0'">
    <SomeProperty>Some value that applies to .NET Core 2.0 and later<SomeProperty>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <PropertyGroup Condition="$(TargetFramework::Name)=='net5.0-ios13.0'">
    <SomeProperty>Some value that only applies to .NET 5 + iOS 13.0<SomeProperty>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <PropertyGroup Condition="$(TargetFramework::Platform)=='windows'">
    <SomeProperty>Some value that applies to all version of Windows<SomeProperty>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <PropertyGroup Condition="$(TargetFramework::Platform)>='ios-12.0'">
    <SomeProperty>Some value that applies to iOS 12.0 and later<SomeProperty>
  </PropertyGroup>

</Project>
```

And lastly, we could just define new intrinsic functions on some type,
but this will make using them a mouthful:

```XML

>   <PropertyGroup Condition="`'$([MSBuild]::TargetFrameworkIdentifier($(TargetFramework)))' == '.NETStandard'`">

Reviewer 24: This is the most "like the rest of existing MSBuild". Of course that means it's super ugly :)

Another option would be to create a new [intrinsic function for conditions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/msbuild/msbuild-conditions?view=vs-2019) (we currently have only `Exists` and `HasTrailingSlash`).

Author: Moved to: https://github.com/microsoft/msbuild/issues/5171

> we should go down the road of not doing it at first." --
> [@rainersigwald](https://github.com/rainersigwald)

### Window-specific behavior

_**Open Issue**. Review with WinForms/WPF & Windows folks._

* We need to define what the Windows version number is. It should probably be
  the minimum for WPF/WinForms (because that makes the most sense until we ship
  support for WinRT in .NET 5). Generally speaking, we expect UWP flavors to
  burn in into the project file, just like iOS and Android.

* When would the WinRT APIs be referenced? Should they show up by default
  (assuming the project specified they correct version for the WinRT bindings)

>   or should there be an equivalent for `UseWinForms`? We probably don't want an

Reviewer 20: It's actually `UseWindowsForms` for WinForms and `UseWPF` for WPF.

```suggestion
  or should there be an equivalent for `UseWindowsForms`? We probably don't want an
```

Author: Fixed

[@mhutch](https://github.com/mhutch) is working on a document specifically
around SDK convergence.

> ### Why is there new TFM for Linux?

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
### Why is there no new TFM for Linux?
```

Author: Fixed

The primary reason for OS specific TFMs is to vary API surface, not for varying
behavior. RIDs allow varying behavior and have support for various Linux
flavors. Specifically, TFMs aren't (primarily) meant to allow calling P/Invokes
under `#if`, most of the time that should be done by doing runtime checks or by
using RIDs. The primary reason for a TFM is to exclude large amounts of managed
representations for OS technologies (WinForms, WPF, Apple's NS APIs, Android
etc).

Also, Android, iOS, macOS, and Windows share that they offer a stable ABI so
that exchanging binaries makes sense. Linux is too generic of a concept for
that, it's basically just the kernel, which again boils down to the only thing

> you can do is calling P/Invokes.

Reviewer 16: This does answer my question, thanks.

* We'll follow the rule-based creation in SDK-style projects which takes the
  friendly TFM name without the OS flavor, makes it upper-case and replaces
  special characters with an underscore.
* For OS flavors we'll do the same, i.e. create versionless as well as version
  specific symbols.

In order to make it easier to update code, especially when doing
multi-targeting, we should make them additive, so that when targeting `net6.0`

> both `NET6_0` and `NET5_0` are defined. The same applies to OS bindings.

Reviewer 28: You'd be able to simplify it to:

```csharp
#if NET5 && TIZEN7
//... Common CODE to both net5.0 and net6.0 on tizen7.0...
#endif
```

If you want different code for net7.0, then you'd do this:

```csharp
#if NET7 && TIZEN7
//... Code specific to net7.0+ on tizen 7.0...
#elif NET5 && TIZEN7
//... Common CODE to net5.0 and net6.0 on tizen7.0...
#endif
```

> both `NET6_0` and `NET5_0` are defined. The same applies to OS bindings.

Reviewer 20: When I look at the defines, I have to know, what exactly am I `#if`-defining the code for. The current way is verbose but it tells me exactly what it is. The new way is locked on the fact that Every API ever and will be developed should be available in newer .NET, which is very bad.

Overtime we would have a bloat in BCL and in our libraries. I don't want that, nor any of us!

> both `NET6_0` and `NET5_0` are defined. The same applies to OS bindings.

Author: From experience we know that the current stuff breaks every time the library is upgraded to a newer version. In the new scheme, the only `#if` statements that need to be revised are the ones that need to call newer APIs. 

> The new way is locked on the fact that Every API ever and will be developed should be available in newer .NET, which is very bad.

But that's how the .NET platforms works in 99.99999% of cases. We made very very very API breaking changes between releases of the platform. That's not a bug, that's a feature.

Examples:

* `net5.0`
  * `NETCOREAPP`, `NETCOREAPP3_1` (for backwards compatibility)
  * `NET`, `NET5_0`  
* `net6.0`
  * (same as `net5.0`)

>   * `NET6_0`  

Reviewer 28: Have in mind that there may be *a lot* of these defines, since there will be one for every release.

Say you have this code:

```csharp
#if IOS14_0
// Do something awesome Apple added support for in iOS 14
#endif
```

In your approach that code would stop working with iOS 14.1, since then we'd define `IOS14_1`, and not `IOS14_0`.

If you want something in a specific version only, you could do:

```csharp
#if NET_5_0 && !NET_6_0
// Code specific to net5.0...
#endif
```
```

>   * `NET6_0`  

Reviewer 20: > Have in mind that there may be a lot of these defines, since there will be one for every release.

It'll be there even if I don't target `net5`, `net6` when I'm targeting `net7`. This is why I don't want this. The defines should be specific to the binding packages and it's version.

> In your approach that code would stop working with iOS 14.1, since then we'd define `IOS14_1`, and not `IOS14_0`.

You could define `IOS14` in addition to those. But that's not the point. The defines, including platform and version specific props should come from the bindings package.

__Putting everything in the SDK is not an answer. It just leads to more bloat.__

>   * `NET6_0`  

Author: As I said above, the problem with the current approach is that it breaks code as soon as the version is added (in multi-targeting) or bumped. We don't want this. Yes, this means that the SDK will have to grow but I don't think it's that bad because if defined correct, they can be chained.
